Add MCIP for block streaming. (#29)
mobilecoinfoundation/mcips: text/0029-block-streaming.md

* Feature Name: `block_streaming`
* Start Date: 2022-03-01
* MCIP PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mcips #29](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/29)
* Tracking Issue: [mobilecoin #1433](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/issues/1433)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This MCIP formalizes the API for getting blocks from consensus nodes.

This includes defining an API for streaming blocks using a dedicated fanout
mechanism, rather than repeatedly polling S3 for new blocks.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

About 40% of the end-to-end transaction time is spent writing to and reading
from S3. This can be optimized using a dedicated
[publish/subscribe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern)
mechanism to distribute updates across nodes.

<details>
<summary>Details on the 40% figure</summary>

As shown in the screenshot below (dated 2021-11-17), of the 5 seconds to
externalize a transaction, we spent almost one second uploading to S3, and
another second downloading from S3.

![trace screenshot](../images/29-trace.png)
</details>

> 

Reviewer: Can you add one more paragraph to close out the motivation for the proposed change, e.g.

> By using pub/sub block streaming, we will no longer need to poll S3 on regular intervals, and the block download times will greatly decrease.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

This is a backend implementation change that should be transparent to everyone
else.

When a node starts up, it will subscribe to updates from its peer consensus
nodes, and request (or be configured with) the base URL for fetching archived
blocks, and fetch those in parallel.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

There are two mechanisms for getting blocks from consensus nodes:
1. A streaming API for getting the latest blocks, and
2. A backfill/discovery API specifying where to find archived blocks.

Each consensus node's ledger is distributed via a local "side-car" process,

> `ledger-distribution`, to an associated directory in the `mobilecoin.chain` S3

Reviewer: MainNet archive is at `ledger.mainnet.mobilecoin.com` bucket, TestNet is at `mobilecoin.chain` bucket

bucket.

> The other nodes then download these blocks from S3, usually via `mobilecoind` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other nodes then download these blocks from S3, via the `ledger-sync` crate. Other services, such as Fog, use `mobilecoind` to sync blocks, and wallets such as `full-service` also implement the syncing functionality.
```

No need to use that suggestion directly - trying to capture that the [ledger-sync](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/tree/master/ledger/sync) crate is used in multiple products. Ultimately, we are deprecating `mobilecoind`, but it is still being used for syncing purposes in Fog. The validator nodes [use ledger-sync directly in their catchup code](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/blob/master/consensus/service/src/byzantine_ledger/mod.rs#L145).

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! I integrated it, with links.

is the bucket size, and the index is that of the starting block (also a multiple
of `N`).

`ledger-distribution` will default to merging into buckets of 100, 1000 and
10000 blocks.

For example:
* merged blocks with `N=10` and starting index `0` will be at
  `$BASE/merged-10/00/00/00/00/00/00/00/0000000000000000.pb`,
* merged blocks with `N=1000` and starting index `1_000_000_000_000_000` will be
  at `$BASE/merged-1000/00/03/8d/7e/a4/c6/80/00038d7ea4c68000.pb`

See
[`merged_block_num_to_s3block_path`](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/search?q=fn.merged_block_num_to_s3block_path)
for an implementation of this logic.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The primary drawback is introducing a dependency on another subsystem, namely
the message bus, which may affect our uptime or/and throughput.

With that said, this is an additive change, since we will fall back to S3 if no
messages arrive, so the behaviour and performance in the worst-case scenario
matches the existing system.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

The main constraints for the fanout mechanism are performance, maintaining

> decentralization (i.e. not introducing a centralized service), and interfacing

Author: Added a section outlining the fanout network.

> handling trillions of events a day. Initially conceived as a messaging queue,
> Kafka is based on an abstraction of a distributed commit log. Since being
> created and open sourced by LinkedIn in 2011, Kafka has quickly evolved from
> messaging queue to a full-fledged event streaming platform.

Pros:
* Kafka is an established message bus, with a fair bit of established experience
  hosting and operating instances, including many cloud-hosted options.
  * Cloud providers include
    [Confluent Cloud](https://www.confluent.io/confluent-cloud/),
    [Amazon Managed Streaming](https://aws.amazon.com/msk/),
    [Cloud Kafka](https://www.cloudkarafka.com/)
  * Self-hosting is also a fairly popular option.
  * [Managed Apache Kafka Vs. DIY: What’s The Difference And How To Choose?](https://keen.io/blog/managed-apache-kafka-vs-diy/)

Cons:
- Unclear how to safely expose Kafka interface across operators.
- Having one Kafka broker per consensus node could negate the benefits of using
  Kafka

### Google Cloud Pub/Sub

[Google Cloud also offers a Pub/Sub solution](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/)

Pros:
* Horizontally scalable managed messaging offering.

Cons:

> * Risks vendor lock-in.

Reviewer: I'm assuming we're not considering [Amazon SNS](https://aws.amazon.com/sns/?sc_channel=ta&sc_campaign=modernmessagingapplicationintegration&sc_geo=namer&sc_country=us&sc_outcome=aware&whats-new-cards.sort-by=item.additionalFields.postDateTime&whats-new-cards.sort-order=desc) because it won't support the throughput we need, and it's hard to do multi-tenant?

Author: No, I just hadn't looked into it 🙃 Added.

}

service ConsensusUpdates {
    rpc Subscribe(SubscribeRequest) returns (stream SubscribeResponse);
}
```

### Fanout network layout
This MCIP intentionally avoids prescribing a particular layout for the fanout
network, in part because various operators have unique constraints, but also
because it is affected by other implementation decisions that are yet to be
determined, and can be changed without affecting the rest of this proposal.

With that said, we outline some possible approaches below.

#### Serve from consensus node
Add the `ConsensusUpdates` gRPC server to the consensus node binary.

Pros:
* Simple setup.

Cons:
* Mixes [concerns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_concerns).
* The consensus node is now serving additional gRPC traffic, which may very well
  make the node easier to overload, potentially leading to a DDoS.
* Negates the benefit of having a separate `ledger-distribution` binary.

#### Message bus per cluster
Set up a message bus per cluster of nodes (e.g. a data center or availability
zone), similar to how one might have a shared cache instance.

Pros:
* Maintains decentralization.
* Matches network topology.

> * May unlocks scaling benefits of dedicated brokers for the fanout network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* May unlock scaling benefits of dedicated brokers for the fanout network.
```
